Maternity Leave in NYC
================
November 5, 2020

**Contributors:** Amanda Warnock (aw3251), Meghan Bellerose (meb2308),
Akanksha Nalatwad (asn2139), & Karina Myers (km3529)

**Tentative project title:** Exploring Maternity Leave in NYC

**Motivation for this project:** There are many socioeconomic
disparities related to maternal health outcomes (CDC, 2020). A piece of
this problem is unequal access to paid maternity leave. In this project,
we will explore racial, economic, and geographic differences in access
to paid maternity leave within New York City and the factors that
influence parents’ return to work after having a child.

**Intended final products:**

  - A bar chart showing differences in length of maternity leave by
    ethnicity/race and single mothers vs. co-parents
  - A bar chart showing factors affecting return to work
  - A scatter plot of length of maternity leave (0-24 weeks) by income
    level
  - Plots comparing depression, welfare, and income before and after
    childbirth
  - A leaflet map showing average length of maternity leave by zipcode,
    with the option to select each of the five NYC boroughs and hover
    over zipcodes for average household income

**Anticipated data sources:** We intend to use data from the NYC Work
and Family Leave Survey (WFLS). The NYC WFLS is a telephone survey
conducted in March 2016, which was administered to 1,000 New York City
residents who gave birth in 2014. The goal was to understand the
availability and accessibility of paid family leave to working parents.
The WLFS also sought to describe the role that paid family leave
policies play in achieving health equity for parents and children. The
data is located
[here](https://data.cityofnewyork.us/Health/New-York-City-Work-and-Family-Leave-Survey-WFLS-20/grnn-mvqe).
Information on this survey can be found
[here](https://www1.nyc.gov/assets/doh/downloads/pdf/hca/paid-family-leave-report1.pdf).

We may also use income data from the 2016 American Community Survey
(ACS), as the NYC WFLS includes a limited number of income categories,
with $85,000 or more as the highest option.

**Planned analyses / visualizations / coding challenges:** There are 156
variables in this dataset and over 1,000 rows. We will first filter for
variables of interest, apply more intuitive variable names, and exclude
missing data. Based on our initial exploration of the dataset and
visualizations, we will determine which factors seem to be related to
women’s return to work after giving birth. We will then perform a
spacial regression analysis to formally test the association between
these factors and length of paid maternity leave.

We anticipate challenges in building a leaflet map by zipcode. We also
anticipate challenges incorporating income data, since categorization of
income is limited in the main datasource.

**Planned Timeline**

  - 11/10: light lit-review and finalize variables of interest
  - 11/12: finalize and clean dataset and assign plots
  - 11/19: draft of each plot complete so we can get feedback at our
    weekly group meeting
  - 12/1: finalize plots and analyses, work on webpage and screencast

Source:
<https://www.cdc.gov/media/releases/2019/p0905-racial-ethnic-disparities-pregnancy-deaths.html>
